JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
MILES O'BRIEN: And I'm Miles
O'Brien.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
President Trump takes to Twitter
to defend
his immigration order amid
upheaval that brought
thousands across the country to
protest at
airports and on the street.
MILES O'BRIEN: Also ahead this
Monday: what
is it's like to be caught up in
the chaos,
refugee reaction to the ban.
ALI ABDI, Green Card Holder: Who
are these
people who are now banned from
entering the
country.
There are students like me,
graduate students
who are doing their Ph.D.s,
doing their masters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, Madeleine
Albright, Kansas
Secretary of State Kris Kobach
and our Politics
Monday team break down the
legal, domestic
and foreign implications of the
tumultuous
first days of the Trump
administration.
MILES O'BRIEN: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
We're having guests join me here
at the "NewsHour"
anchor desk in the coming weeks.
Tonight, it's a familiar face,
our science
correspondent, Miles O'Brien.
Welcome, Miles.
MILES O'BRIEN: Judy, it's a
pleasure to be
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's great to
have you.
So, now we begin with the
ongoing uproar over
President Trump's order on
refugees and immigrants.
John Yang reports on this day's
events.
JOHN YANG: After a weekend of
mass protests
and chaos at airports, White
House Press Secretary
Sean Spicer insists it's all an
overreaction.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
We have got to keep this in
proportion, folks.
This was 109 people being
stopped out of 325
over a 24-hour period.
And I know that everyone likes
to get where
they want to get to as quick as
possible,
and I think the government did a
phenomenal
job of making sure that we
process people
through.
JOHN YANG: In any event, Spicer
said, it's
a small price to pay.
SEAN SPICER: We don't know when
that individual
crosses into our border to do us
harm.
And so the idea of waiting when
you don't
know could it be that night,
could it be the
next day, could it be the next
week, and the
president's view is, I'm not
going to wait.
JOHN YANG: President Trump
sparked the uproar
with the stroke of a pen,
signing an executive
order banning people from seven
Muslim-majority
countries from entering the
United States
for 90 days, effective
immediately.
Across the country, there were
protests on
college campuses and at
airports.
A federal judge in New York
blocked the ban
for people who were either
already in transit
or had arrived in the United
States.
In Seattle today, Washington
State Attorney
General Bob Ferguson announced a
new lawsuit,
and said he's got the support of
Amazon and
Expedia.
BOB FERGUSON, Washington State
Attorney General:
In our view, the president is
not adhering
to the Constitution when it
comes to his executive
action.
It's my responsibility as
attorney general
to defend the rule of law, the
uphold the
Constitution on behalf of the
people of this
state.
JOHN YANG: State Department
employees circulated
a dissent channel memo.
It warned the policy will not
achieve its
aim of making our country safer
and that it
runs counter to core American
values.
Spicer said, if they oppose the
policy, they
could quit.
Federal judges intervened to
protect foreign
holders of green cards, legal
permanent residents
of the United States.
Overnight, Homeland Security
Secretary John
Kelly waived the travel ban for
green card
holders.
At breakfast with small business
leaders today,
President Trump said his
immigration order
was a success.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: We actually had a very
good day yesterday
in terms of homeland security.
And some day, we had to make the
move, and
we decided to make the move.
JOHN YANG: He blamed chaos at
airports on
a Delta Air Lines' computer
problem and on
Democrats.
DONALD TRUMP: I noticed that
Chuck Schumer
yesterday with fake tears.
I'm going to ask him, who was
his acting coach
because I know him very well.
I don't see him as a crier.
JOHN YANG: On Twitter, the
president said
he didn't give advance notice of
the order
because he didn't want to tip
off would-be
terrorists.
He said: "If the ban were
announced with a
one-week notice, the bad would
rush into our
country during that week."
A number of Republican senators,
including
Marco Rubio, Susan Collins,
Lindsey Graham
and John McCain, criticized the
order and
the way it was rolled out.
Former President Obama weighed
in with a statement
today, saying he "fundamentally
disagrees
with targeting people based on
religion."
He also seemed to encourage the
protests,
saying, "It's exactly what we
expect to see
when American values are at
stake."
Meanwhile, Mr. Trump signed a
new executive
action today significantly
cutting federal
regulations.
DONALD TRUMP: There will be
regulation.
There will be control, but it
will be a normalized
control, where you can open your
business
and expand your business very
easily.
And that is what our country has
been all
about.
JOHN YANG: The order requires
that, for every
new regulation proposed, two
regulations must
be repealed.
And it says the net economic
cost of new regulations
must be zero.
The president also announced
that Lockheed
Martin has cut $600 million from
its next
batch of F-35 Joint Strike
fighter planes
after he criticized the cost.
That Obama statement is not
worthy.
On his way out, aides suggested
that the former
president would give the new
president what
he said he was grateful to
former President
Bush for giving him, silence.
But in his final press
conference, he said
he was tempted to speak out if
he saw core
American values being
threatened.
Turns out he didn't wait very
long -- Miles.
MILES O'BRIEN: John, a couple of
other interesting
bits at the briefing.
The reorganization of the
National Security
Council, the permanent or
principal seats,
putting a political strategist
in one of those,
Steve Bannon, did Mr. Spicer
address that?
JOHN YANG: Today, a lot of
eyebrows being
raised about that.
Spicer defended it, noted that
Bannon had
been a Naval officer, even
though that was
more than four decades ago.
He also pointed out that David
Axelrod, the
political adviser to President
Obama, occasionally
sat in on some NSC meetings and
said that
by putting Bannon and giving him
a seat permanently
on the NSC, it was their bow to
transparency.
MILES O'BRIEN: Speaking of
seats, empty seat
on the Supreme Court, big
announcement on
that.
Tell us about it.
JOHN YANG: Tomorrow night in
prime time, just
like "The Apprentice," he is
going to announce
it live on television.
You may remember he tweeted last
week that
the announcement would be coming
on Thursday.
Why the change?
Spicer said because he wanted to
-- Miles.
MILES O'BRIEN: John Yang at the
White House,
thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the day's
other news:
The president's immigration
order provoked
a growing backlash overseas.
In Iraq, members of parliament
voted to demand
retaliation.
Under the order, Iraqis are now
banned from
entering the U.S.
And, in London, Britain's
foreign secretary
said Mr. Trump's planned state
visit will
go ahead, despite the
immigration order.
BORIS JOHNSON, British Foreign
Minister: I
have said that it's divisive, I
have said
that it's wrong, and I have said
that it stigmatizes
people on grounds of their
nationality.
But what I will not do is
disengage from conversations
with our American friends and
partners in
such a way as to do material
damage to the
interests of U.K. citizens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More than a
million British
citizens have petitioned against
the Trump
visit set for later this year.
MILES O'BRIEN: President Trump's
pick to be
secretary of state survived a
key procedural
vote in the Senate tonight.
Republicans resisted a
Democratic push to
delay action on Rex Tillerson, a
former ExxonMobil
CEO.
That clears the way for a
confirmation vote
this week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Yemen,
security officials
say a suspected U.S. drone
strike killed two
al-Qaida militants today.
It came a day after U.S.
commandos killed
three alleged leaders of
al-Qaida's branch
in Yemen.
Thirty other people and one U.S.
Navy SEAL
died in the Sunday raid.
It was the first U.S. combat
death under President
Trump.
MILES O'BRIEN: Police in Quebec
City, Canada,
are looking for a motive after a
shooting
at a mosque left six dead last
night.
A suspect is in custody.
More than 50 people were in the
mosque at
the time of the attack.
Officials say it was an act of
terror, and
they're calling for unity.
MAN: Normal in times of crisis
that everyone
will speak with the same voice
of tolerance,
integration and inclusion.
The real challenge will be two
weeks from
now to continue saying this, to
refuse any
compromise towards intolerance
or exclusion.
MILES O'BRIEN: Later in
Parliament, Prime
Minister Justin Trudeau spoke
directly to
the more than one million in
Canada and he
said to them, "We are with you."
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Philippines'
national police
forces will no longer take part
in a sweeping
anti-drug campaign in that
country.
The crackdown began in July,
when President
Rodrigo Duterte took office.
Since then, about 7,000 people
have been killed.
But the national police chief
said he's calling
a halt after rogue officers
kidnapped and
killed a South Korean
businessman for money.
MILES O'BRIEN: The man accused
of killing
five people and wounding six at
the Fort Lauderdale
Airport pleaded not guilty
today.
Esteban Santiago appeared in
federal court
on 22 charges from the shooting
this month.
Authorities say he opened fire
in the baggage
claim area with a handgun he'd
stowed in a
checked bag.
He'd flown in from Anchorage,
Alaska.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street had a
rough day
as the president's immigration
order depressed
airline stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 122
points to fall back below 20000.
The Nasdaq fell 47, and the S&P
500 gave up
12.
MILES O'BRIEN: And doctors in
Houston released
former President George H.W.
Bush from a Houston
hospital today.
He'd been there for two weeks
with pneumonia.
Mr. Bush is 92.
His wife, Barbara, now 91, was
released last
week from the same hospital.
She was treated for bronchitis.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
we did in
to reactions to the travel ban,
including
from former Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright
and Kansas Secretary of State
Kris Kobach;
plus, are you addicted to your
smartphone?
A former Google employee worries
we all are.
We will tell you how he's trying
to change
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we reported
earlier, President
Trump's executive order barring
people coming
to the U.S. from certain
countries sparked
widespread protests and
confusion over the
weekend.
The "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham spent much
of yesterday tracking that
response, and talking
with people who've been affected
by the order.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The arrivals
gate at any
airport, not just here at Dulles
outside of
Washington, is normally a quiet
scene of warm
greetings and family reunions,
but not this
weekend.
Protests erupted within hours
Friday and continued
all weekend, after President
Trump issued
his sweeping executive order
temporarily barring
all refugees and travelers from
seven majority-Muslim
nations.
Syrian refugees were blocked
indefinitely.
The president said it was
crucial to keeping
America safe.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: Protection of the nation
from foreign
terrorist entry into the United
States.
We all know what that means.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Trump
administration
insisted again today that
coverage of the
problems has been overblown.
But the orders did cause
widespread confusion
at the nation's airports.
Who was turned away?
Who had been detained?
Did having a green card mean you
could enter?
According to media reports,
customs and immigration
officials had little advance
warning of the
order, a claim the White House
denied.
An army of volunteer lawyers
gathered to help
families of those detained.
Mariam Masumi is an immigration
attorney in
Northern Virginia.
®MD-BO /
MARIAM MASUMI, Immigration
Attorney: There
was no communication between any
of the agencies.
I think that this order was just
issued without
any cooperation, collaboration.
And it's caused a lot of
confusion on the
part of so many agencies.
Without the knowledge and
whether those people
are back there, we can't help.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Even members
of Congress
said they were in the dark.
Representative Don Beyer, a
Virginia Democrat,
was at Dulles trying to find out
if people
being detained had access to
lawyers, as a
federal judge had ordered.
Beyer said he couldn't even find
out how many
people were being held.
So, you, as a member of
Congress, cannot get
an answer as to how many people
our government
is holding here?
REP.
DON BEYER (D), Virginia: That's
exactly correct
right now.
This notion of cooperation
between the executive
branch and the legislative
branch seems to
have totally broken down.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And it wasn't
just Democrats.
Congresswoman Barbara Comstock
is a Republican
who's long advocated for
stricter vetting
of immigrants.
But she said this move was too
broad and poorly
executed.
REP.
BARBARA COMSTOCK (R), Virginia:
We need to
go back to the drawing board on
this.
As I have consistently said, we
shouldn't
have a ban on people coming to
this country
based on religion.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The executive
order caused
problems outside the U.S. as
well.
With the policy issued so
swiftly, Ali Abdi
didn't know what to do.
Abdi is a Yale Ph.D. student
originally from
Iran who was studying abroad.
He lives in the U.S. and has a
green card.
And even though officials have
clarified that
means he can come home, he was
worried about
trying.
I spoke with him via Skype from
Dubai this
morning.
ALI ABDI, Green Card Holder:
There has been
even changes in the way the
order has been
interpreted over the last 48
hours.
And I am very, very hopeful that
the other
side of the U.S., which is not
bigotry and
racism, changes the status quo.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He says people
like him
are not the ones to be feared.
ALI ABDI: Let's see who are
these people who
are now banned from entering the
country.
There are students like me,
graduate students
who are doing their Ph.D.s,
doing their master's.
And they were later meant to
serve the American
public by teaching there, by
producing knowledge
there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Another Ph.D.
student and
green card holder tried her luck
getting back
home on Friday night.
Nisrin Elamin is Sudanese, but
she's lived
in the U.S. for 20 years.
She's getting her Ph.D. at
Stanford, but was
in Sudan doing research.
Her return was a homecoming like
no other.
NISRIN ELAMIN, Green Card
Holder: I was taken
to a room and I was patted down,
which was
quite uncomfortable because I
was touched
in my chest and groin area.
And then I was handcuffed very
briefly, at
which point I started to cry,
not so much
because of the handcuffs, but
because, at
that point, I felt like I was
probably going
to get deported.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: After more
than five hours
at JFK Airport in New York,
Elamin was released
and told it would be best for
her not to leave
the U.S. again, leaving her
potentially separated
from her family indefinitely.
NISRIN ELAMIN: But the order, as
it stands
right now, my parents aren't
green card holders,
and they, at this point, will
not be able
to apply for a visa to enter the
United States
if they wanted to visit me.
Similarly, my sister, who lives
in Australia
and is a dual citizen, cannot
apply for a
visa.
So, at present, we're in three
different continents,
and we can't see each other
because I'm also
not comfortable traveling.
And that makes me very sad.
It also scares me a little bit.
ZAINAB CHAUDRY, Council on
American-Islamic
Relations: With just a stroke of
a pen, people's
lives have changed completely.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Zainab Chaudry
is with the
Council on American-Islamic
relations.
She arranged for some speakers
to come to
this Muslim center in Maryland
to help answer
people's questions.
Her group, CAIR, filed a federal
lawsuit today
challenging the
constitutionality of the
president's
order.
ZAINAB CHAUDRY: I received a
phone call from
a man who's not a citizen.
He's a legal permanent citizen,
LPR, and his
mother passed away in Iran.
And he was advised by his
attorney to not
travel to Iran to bury his
mother because
he wouldn't be able -- chances
are he wouldn't
be able to return to the United
States.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Last night at
his mosque
in Washington, D.C., Imam Talib
Shareef said
even American citizens in his
congregation
are afraid.
TALIB SHAREEF, Imam: They're
afraid because
they don't know.
Obviously, there's a sense of
anger right
now that this is happening.
They're saying, how could this
have been allowed
to happen?
They're contributing citizens.
They haven't done anything
wrong.
They have no intentions of doing
anything
wrong.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He's worried
these fears
could fester into anger, and
stir the pot
of resentment.
TALIB SHAREEF: We're now going
to create enemies
and we're going to divide the
country further.
They are hearing significant
people from the
administration saying, we're
just getting
started.
So, what does that mean?
What does that mean for the
citizens who share
a religious label that has been
targeted?
What does that mean?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Trump
administration
says that, in time, people will
see the value
of this action and it will
improve the nation's
security.
But, meanwhile, protesters,
lawyers and religious
groups alike continue to watch,
warily.
For the "PBS NewsHour" I'm
William Brangham
in Washington, D.C.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, for more on
the executive
order on refugees and visa
holders and changes
the president to the makeup of
the National
Security Council, we turn first
to former
Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright.
She served as the United States'
top diplomat
during the Clinton
administration.
When we spoke a short time ago,
I began by
asking her reaction to the Trump
White House
ban on immigrants from seven
countries.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT, Former U.S.
Secretary
of State: Judy, I'm appalled,
because it's
done everything except keep
America safer.
And let me just say, I kind of
have looked
at things thinking that they
made this executive
action without really
understanding what it's
all about.
So, it was unprepared, I would
say, because
they didn't really see how the
government
works.
They didn't really contact the
various departments
that are part of this homeland
security, trying
to figure out what would happen
once you do
something like this from the
Oval Office.
So, unprepared.
And then I think, also, part of
the problem
was, they didn't understand what
I say the
unintended consequences of this,
because the
truth is that the countries that
have been
designated are now reacting,
creating more
problems for us, and then
banning people -- our
people from going there.
For instance, in Iraq, how do we
protect our
troops?
What about the people that are
interpreting?
And then I think all of it is
based on untrue
facts.
And so I think it is a very
serious problem
in terms of how the whole system
works.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me take
a couple
of those, one at a time.
What they're saying is if --
they're saying,
if they had let the rest of the
government
know what they were doing, that
it would have
leaked, and they said there
would have been
a flood of people trying to get
in.
And they also say that they're
basically only
following what the Obama
administration had
done a few years ago in listing
countries
that were the most for the
United States to
fear in terms of terrorism.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Well, the
latter is true.
What was happened was, there was
an incident
where something was coming out
of Iraq.
They were concerned about what
the facts really
were.
They wanted to re-vet some
people.
They didn't have enough manpower
to do that,
so things slowed down.
So there is nothing like that
that happened
in the Obama administration.
I think the excuse about not
letting others
know, first of all, they need to
understand
that the government, in fact,
when people
trust each other, doesn't leak
out when it's
an important issue.
But how can you not let the
departments that
have something to do with
executing the order
not know?
Because I think that they were
genuinely surprised
by, you know, how slow it was,
what happened
when they detained people, what
happened then
when there were demonstrations
against it.
So I'm willing to say they were
surprised
at the reaction to it, but
that's a sign of
the fact they didn't understand
what they
were doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The other
argument they make,
Secretary Albright, is this will
all settle
out, it's just the hurly-burly
of the first
few days, that it's only 109
people, they
said, out of over 300,000
travelers over the
weekend, and that we're all
making too much
of this.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: No, we're
not, because
what it's shown is that the
United States
is not prepared to deal with
something that
the president has decided he
wants to do,
so it puts real question as to
how the system
works.
It also has undermined other
countries' trust
in what we do, trying to figure
out who in
the department is responsible
for what.
And then I actually think it's a
gift to those
that hate us, because now what
has happened
is ISIS is really kind of
saying, yes, right,
this is what America is like,
you can't trust
us.
And so I think they basically
were completely
unprepared for what they kind of
unwrapped,
without really considering the
unintended
consequences, and I don't think
it makes us
any safer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the other
moves the
Trump administration made over
the weekend
was to announce a reorganization
of the National
Security Council, which, in
effect, appears
to downgrade the role of the
director of national
intelligence, and also the
chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.
They had also downgraded the
role of the CIA
director, but they now in the
last -- today
have restored that.
How do you read that move on the
part of President
Trump?
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Well, I
teach about decision-making,
so I have been thinking about
this.
And I think it also wasn't
thought out, and
partially because -- we have
heard a lot of
stories about how the transition
really wasn't
done very well.
I have been transitioned into
and I have done
the transitioning.
It's a fascinating process of
turning over
the crown jewels when it's done
properly.
That didn't happen.
And so I think they didn't
understand how
the system works, and, in fact,
downgrading
the role of the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs.
Maybe they think they already
have too many
generals, but the bottom line is
that it's
important for that person to be
in the meetings
no matter what.
And what they have done is say
only when it's
really necessary, decided by the
national
security adviser, and the same
for the director
of national intelligence.
It's important to know the
intelligence and
the response of the military.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The other change
they made
was to add Steve Bannon, who is
a senior adviser
to the president, to the -- the
campaign adviser
-- add him to the National
Security Council
attendees, principals -- I guess
you call
it principals list.
Their argument is, well, the
Obama administration
had people like David Axelrod
and others who
sat in on national security
meeting.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: That -- you
know, frankly,
that is the most outrageous
thing that they
have done, is to add somebody
with an extreme
ideology to those that are
supposed to be
making decisions based on U.S.
national interests,
not on ideology.
And it's one thing to have one
of the advisers
come in on occasion when the
issue is some
combination of domestic and
foreign policy,
but not to have somebody with
the views of
Bannon that we now hear to be
there all the
time.
And the troublesome part about
all this is,
what is the circle around the
president?
Who does he listen to?
And the examples that we have
had, whether
it's now with the immigration
executive action
or just generally, is the
decision-making
process.
We're not a new country.
We have had a decision-making
process.
And they have, in fact,
developed something
different.
And, Judy, I thought the
following.
Disruption is not a bad thing
for bureaucracy.
Destruction, however, is very
dangerous.
And so what we have seen in the
last week,
I think, is dangerous.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly,
last question.
Impression of Rex Tillerson, who
is the president's
designee to be the next
secretary of state?
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Well, I have
met him.
I think he's a very fine person.
He's been a very good CEO of
Exxon.
The question is how he's going
to operate
within this particular setup,
how he's going
to work with the State
Department, where a
top group of people have left
who are some
of the operational people, and
then how is
he going to define what the
roles of the State
Department is?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Madeleine
Albright, former
secretary of state, thank you
very much for
talking with us.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Great to be
with you.
Thank you.
MILES O'BRIEN: And for a
different point of
view, I spoke a short while ago
to Kansas
Secretary of State Kris Kobach,
was a top
adviser to Mr. Trump during his
presidential
campaign and transition process.
I began by asking him whether
the U.S. is
safer now as a result of the
White House ban.
KRIS KOBACH (R), Kansas
Secretary of State:
These seven countries are the
hotbeds of terrorism.
They include places where ISIS
controls foreign
territory.
And they are places where people
are coming
in to receive terrorist training
and then
being pushed out to carry out
acts of terrorism
across Europe, perhaps in the
United States
and elsewhere.
And so, absolutely, it makes
sense to put
a temporary bar on people
holding those passports
from coming into the United
States.
Also another really important
part of this
executive order was the
reviewing our refugee
program, also putting that on
hold, because
we have huge problems with
terrorists abusing
our refugee program.
I might just give you a quick
statistic there.
Since the 1990s, there have been
18 major
terrorists who have either
committed acts
of terror or names you would
recognize who
got into our refugee program.
The blind sheik, Omar
Abdel-Rahman, came in
through the refugee program.
The two Boston Marathon bombers
originally
came into the United States
through the refugee
program.
The Bowling Green, Kentucky,
terrorists, refugee
program.
So, it makes sense to say, hey,
we're a very
generous nation.
We give out more asylum.
We allow in more refugees than
any other country
on the planet, but we are going
to reassess
how we screen people because way
too many
terrorists are fraudulently
coming into the
United States as refugees.
MILES O'BRIEN: The one problem
with all that
argument is that, of the seven
countries singled
out, no refugees from those
particular countries
are implicated in any attacks.
Were the wrong countries picked?
KRIS KOBACH: No, I don't think
so.
The Bowling Green, Kentucky, I
believe those
were from Iraq.
The geographical locus -- focus
of where the
terrorists are active changes
with time, right?
So, al-Qaida wasn't necessarily
active in
the exact same countries now.
Somalia has become much more
active as a place
where terrorist training and
terrorist activity
occurs.
So it only makes sense that the
seven countries
or 10 countries or however many
we're most
interested in might change over
time as the
facts on the ground change.
MILES O'BRIEN: A practical
question here.
You mentioned Somalia.
If you're trying to do extreme
vetting of
someone who comes from Somalia,
how on earth
do you do that?
Somalia doesn't even really have
a functioning
government.
What does extreme vetting look
like when a
person comes out of a country
like that?
KRIS KOBACH: That's a great
question, because
what happens when someone comes
in, let's
take, for example, someone
coming in as a
refugee.
So, they say that they have a
credible fear
of persecution -- that's the
legal standard
-- in their home country.
Well, if the home country
doesn't even have
a functioning government, you
don't have any
police departments, you don't
have any centralized
database of records, you may not
have any
way of verifying anything that
this person
is saying.
And, right now, in the refugee
program for
the past, you know, 10 years or
so, there
has been a sort of get-to-yes
mentality, take
the refugee's, the intending
refugee's word
for it.
I think we have to be much
stricter.
And we have to say, look, we
need some proof,
we need some evidence that your
story is true,
because there are so many cases
that we learn
about after the fact where the
refugee's story
was completely untrue.
MILES O'BRIEN: Seems like that
would be very
difficult to come up with any
kind of documentation
in that situation.
KRIS KOBACH: It would.
It may be.
MILES O'BRIEN: Let's talk about
politics for
just a -- yes.
Some Republicans on the Hill are
even expressing
concerns about this, Senator
McCain among
them, saying that it basically
fits in -- I'm
paraphrasing -- fits into the
ISIS narrative,
in essence, that their -- the
propaganda that
they spew out is that America is
anti-Muslim,
and this fits into that
narrative well.
If the real concern, the real
threat is homegrown
terrorism, incited by the
Internet, by Twitter,
by Facebook, if that's the real
threat, haven't
we made ourselves less safer by
adding to
this ISIS narrative?
KRIS KOBACH: I don't think so at
all.
I mean, we as a nation can walk
and chew gum
at the same time.
You're absolutely right.
Homegrown terrorism is a threat,
but so is
imported terrorism where the
terrorists are
trained overseas and they are
sent to the
United States to kill Americans.
So we have to do both.
And there's no reason why we
can't do both.
But this is the best way to put
enhanced screening
on people seeking entry to the
United States,
the best way to protect the
American public.
And, remember, that's the first
and highest
purpose of the United States
government is
to protect American citizens.
We are not facing an invasion
from a conventional
army anytime soon, but we are
facing individual
acts of terrorism.
And many of those individuals
come in across
our border through a port of
entry.
And we owe it to the American
people.
The U.S. government owes it to
the American
people to be very cautious in
allowing someone
in from these regions of the
world where we
know ISIS is active and there is
active terrorist
activity and training going on.
MILES O'BRIEN: Is it possible,
though, we
have given ISIS a case in point
for their
argument that the U.S. is
anti-Muslim?
KRIS KOBACH: I don't think so.
You know, I hear the argument
made that this
executive order is anti-Muslim,
and it seems
to me that that's clearly false.
I mean, the -- it's based on the
country of
origin.
So, if you're an atheist, if
you're a Christian,
if you're a Jew coming from one
of these countries,
you will be subject to the same
bar on entry
as a Muslim coming from these
countries.
Furthermore, you have got about
40 additional
countries in the world that are
majority Muslim
and they are not affected by
this executive
order.
So, clearly, on its face, it is
not anti-Muslim.
It is a geographic-based action
to secure
America from people coming from
dangerous
places in the world.
It is a geographic ban.
It's not in any way a religious
ban.
MILES O'BRIEN: OK, but there is
a religious
component to this.
Christians, of course, are
specifically singled
out for priority.
Let me ask you this.
You teach or have taught
constitutional law.
How does this square with the
Constitution?
You know, I'm your student for a
moment.
Teach me about the Constitution
and how this
jibes with what the founding
fathers were
thinking.
KRIS KOBACH: OK.
Well, first of all, the -- no
one who is outside
of the United States and is not
a United States
citizen has a constitutional
right to enter
the United States.
I have heard some people who are
critics of
the president's executive order
argue that
it's unconstitutional.
That's absolutely incorrect.
There is no constitutional right
to enter
the United States.
Even if you have already been in
the United
States in the past, you have no
constitutional
right to come back in.
Second thing is, the Congress
has the authority
to -- it has what's called
plenary authority
to pass laws relating to
immigration.
It has the first and highest
authority to
pass those laws.
And there's a statute, Title 8,
Section 1182F,
which gives the president a
discretion that
if he feels that the entry of
any alien or
class of aliens would be
detrimental to the
national interests of the United
States, he
can exclude those individuals.
And there are similar statutes
going all the
way back to the beginning in
1789 with the
Alien Acts.
George Washington, after they
were passed,
had authority to exclude or
remove anyone
who was a national security
threat way back
then.
So, legally speaking, the
president is on
absolutely secure ground.
People may quibble about the
politics of it
all, but I think, in terms of
the national
security of the United States,
these executive
orders are a win.
And I think that you will find
that, in the
end, the vast majority of
Americans will be
supportive.
MILES O'BRIEN: Kansas Secretary
of State and
former Trump adviser Kris
Kobach, thank you
very much.
KRIS KOBACH: My pleasure.
MILES O'BRIEN: In Iraq, the ban
hit one group
of people particularly hard,
interpreters
and other staff who assisted
American forces
over the last 14 years of
conflict there.
They are eligible to apply for a
special visa
program to emigrate here.
But one former interpreter and
his family
find their plans to move here
are now in doubt.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports
from Northern Iraq.
JANE FERGUSON: After seven years
working with
the U.S. military, Abdul Hamid
Abdul Ghani
has plenty of souvenirs.
He proudly shows us military
coins given to
him by U.S. commanders in Iraq.
ABDUL HAMID, Former Iraqi
Interpreter: And
this was what I got from General
Petraeus.
JANE FERGUSON: As an Iraqi
fluent in English,
he was thrilled to get a job
working with
American troops in 2003 as a
translator.
He dreamt of living in the U.S.
one day.
After lengthy vetting, including
background
checks, fingerprinting and
extensive interviews,
that day was almost at hand.
Ghani, his wife and three
children were supposed
to start a new life in San Diego
next week.
They would be admitted to the
U.S. on a special
immigrant visa, recognizing the
work he had
done for American soldiers.
But, yesterday, he got an e-mail
saying those
plans had been canceled.
ABDUL HAMID: My bags are ready.
They are all packed.
I almost have nothing here now.
My life is destroyed.
I can put it that way.
It's totally destroyed.
JANE FERGUSON: President Trump's
executive
order placed a 90-day block on
visas for Iraqis
to visit the U.S.
Even if that changes thereafter,
Abdul Hamid's
visa requires he enter the U.S.
before the
end of February.
ABDUL HAMID: How can the
president of the
United States do such a thing?
JANE FERGUSON: The work Abdul
Hamid did for
the military has placed him in
danger.
In today's Iraq, having helped
Americans chase
down suspected terrorists is a
risky reputation
to have.
His wife is frightened.
SAFA ABDUL GHANI, Iraq: We are
not safe here,
especially his work from -- with
the Americans,
and he -- threatened...
ABDUL HAMID: Threatened, yes.
SAFA ABDUL GHANI: Threatened,
yes, from terrorists.
JANE FERGUSON: She is also
concerned for their
eldest child.
Tariq is 12 and has Down
syndrome.
His parents had hoped to find
better specialist
care for him in the U.S.
It's not just ordinary Iraqis
who are devastated
by the news of a visa ban.
Parliamentarians in Baghdad are
angry, and
calling for a strong response,
escalating
the diplomatic crisis.
Iraqi lawmakers voted today to
ban visas for
Americans for 90 days.
While the measure has not yet
been approved
by the entire government, it
would affect
the large numbers of American
contract support
staff aiding the American
military in Iraq
right now, who are fighting a
crucial battle
against ISIS.
The Ghanis are still not sure
whether their
plans to move to the U.S. are
impossible now.
Have you told the kids?
Do they understand?
ABDUL HAMID: I haven't told them
that we are
not going yet.
I can't really look at them in
the eye and
tell them, hey, we are not
going, because
they have really high hopes, you
know?
JANE FERGUSON: So, their bags
remain packed,
ready for a future that now
seems much less
certain.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Dohuk, Iraq.
Back in this country, President
Trump's immigration
order has drawn deep divisions
among lawmakers.
Elected officials have voiced
both support
and condemnation, while a number
are yet to
weigh in.
Here to help us understand the
lay of the
land on this and other issues of
the week,
our Politics Monday team, Amy
Walter of The
Cook Political Report and Tamara
Keith of
NPR.
Welcome to both of you.
It's been such a quiet week.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But I thought we
would come
together anyway.
So, this immigration order we
have been talking
about all night, it's a policy
move, serious
consequences, but it also, Amy,
is something
that President Trump talked
about during the
campaign.
He said he was going to move on
immigration.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The public
reaction is interesting.
A Pew poll out earlier this
month showed,
what, by 48 to 42 percent,
people supported
this.
AMY WALTER: Yes, this is
actually -- this
is a Quinnipiac poll that came
out earlier
this month.
And they said very specifically
support or
oppose suspending immigration
from terror-prone
areas, right, sounds very
familiar, even if
it means turning away refugees.
So, they put that in there as
well -- 48 percent
approved.
But, as you know, Judy, the
world that we
live in right now, not
surprisingly, 72 percent
of Republicans supported it.
Only 24 percent of Democrats
said they supported
it, and independents closely
divided.
And such we have the world that
we're going
to inhabit, it looks like, for
the foreseeable
future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Tam, what
we're watching
is a very divided political
reaction, Democrats
almost universally saying this
is a terrible
idea, Republicans divided.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Yes,
Democrats rallying at the
Supreme Court tonight,
introducing legislation that
will go nowhere
or not even be able to be
brought up on the
floor, but Democratic lawmakers
are protesting.
On the Republican side, there
are sort of
a range of reactions.
There are people who strongly
support what
President Trump has signed and
what he is
doing.
There are others who are
expressing concerns,
and that sort of falls into two
categories.
There are people who express a
moral concern
or a concern that action like
this could actually
make us less safe, rather than
more safe,
could give a propaganda
advantage to organizations
like ISIS.
That's John McCain, Lindsey
Graham.
Not very many Republican
senators going that
far.
Most of them are talking more
about like logistical
challenges, about the rollout
could have been
a better.
Well, the rollout could have
been a lot better.
But one senator said, this
extreme vetting
proposal needed more extreme
vetting itself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy, is there --
we're so early
into this next term.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there a
political calculation
for these Republicans?
AMY WALTER: Right.
I think a lot of them are still
waiting to
find out how people are reacting
to it.
So, we pointed to the poll,
which was theoretical.
What do you think about the
theory behind
this?
-- 48 percent support.
Now that we have seen it, the
rollout clearly
varying, not very good, once we
see the sort
of human cost of it, is this
going to change
people's minds, or are they
going to get just
even more hunkered down in this?
And, as we all know, politicians
like to wait
and watch for where the folks
are going.
I think it's really important,
to Tam's point,
that even those Democrats who
sit in red states,
really red states, have come out
unambiguously
against Donald Trump.
And even Republicans who sit in
sort of squishy,
tentatively Republican
districts, most of
them have held back and not said
much.
Some have come out, but mostly
they have held
back.
I think you are going to see
those battle
lines.
As we saw in that poll, if
you're a Democrat,
you are going to support Trump
-- you're going
to oppose him.
If you're a Republican, you are
going to support
him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And yet, Tam, we
see, looking
at a news organization, or at
least an editorial
page that normally is very
friendly to Donald
Trump, The Wall Street Journal,
writing today,
very critical, saying the way --
critical
of the way it was done, saying
he needlessly
very critical, saying the way --
critical
of the way it was done, saying
he needlessly
alienated people, but then goes
on to say,
"The danger is, he will alienate
the friends
and allies at home and abroad he
needs to
succeed."
So, The Journal taking a longer
look at this.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
And that gets to some of the
national security
concerns, that national security
experts and
veterans of national security
argue that this
could actually put us in more
danger, that
there are -- the best allies
that America
has in fighting organizations
like ISIS are
Muslims themselves.
And I think that that's getting
at that, but
it also gets at a little -- it's
almost like
a more liberal editorial board
saying to the
Obama administration, oh, my
gosh, you really
could have done the rollout of
Obamacare better
several years ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sure.
Well, it reminds us, Amy, these
issues are
complicated.
AMY WALTER: They are.
And I think I will go back to
the point that
you brought up earlier, which
is, elections
have consequences.
Donald Trump the candidate said
he was going
to do this.
A lot of people voted.
Millions and millions of people
voted for
Donald Trump the candidate.
He's now the president, and he's
going through
and he's doing this.
And so the sort of outrage that
we're seeing
around the country, while it's
not surprising,
it's also has to -- you have to
remember that
this is something that he
promised that he
was going to do on the campaign
trail and
that he's putting out in
reality.
What we need to do -- and we
talked about
this last week -- is to wait and
watch for
the longer-term implications.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
AMY WALTER: Is it going to have
an impact
on our national security?
We don't know.
There may be something linked to
that.
Is it going to have something to
do with our
diplomacy?
Is it going to have a
detrimental impact on
our diplomacy?
Maybe.
We don't know yet.
But it's clear that this is
something he said
he was going to do, and he's
implementing
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly to
both of you,
another thing we saw is the
influence of Steve
Bannon, senior adviser to the
president.
We saw the president in the last
few days
say that he wants to add Steve
Bannon, Tam,
to the National Security Council
principals,
the people who sit in on these
very important
private sessions on what the
country does.
Steve Bannon is turning out to
be a major
player there.
TAMARA KEITH: And when the
senior stuff was
announced, he was announced at
the same time
as the chief of staff as sort of
a co-equal.
And it's very clear -- it was
clear in the
inaugural address.
It's been clear in many of these
memoranda
and orders that his voice is
there, his words
are there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And people
watching because
of this alt-right narrative
around Breitbart.
AMY WALTER: Right, and that he
is going to
be a very influential voice.
But, at the end of the day, it's
Donald Trump's
name on all the legislation and
all the executive
orders, and the buck stops with
him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter,
Tamara Keith, Politics
Monday, thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Appreciate it.
And a postscript.
I told you on Friday that I
would be interviewing
Vice President Mike Pence
tomorrow, but I
will now be sitting down with
him this Wednesday
at the White House.
Tune in.
MILES O'BRIEN: One billion of us
own a smartphone,
and we know how addicting it can
be.
One former Google employee says
this is no
accident.
Indeed, it is by design.
And he became troubled by the
relentless efforts
of app developers to keep us
glued to the
gadgets.
So, Tristan Harris founded an
organization
called Time Well Spent.
He is asking the tech industry
to bring what
he calls ethical design to its
products.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Cat Wise
has more, part of our ongoing
collaboration
with "The Atlantic."
TRISTAN HARRIS, Founder, Time
Well Spent:
I noticed when I was at
Stanford, there was
a class called the persuasive
technology design
class, and it was a whole lab at
Stanford
that teaches students how to
apply persuasive
psychology principles into
technology to persuade
people to use products in a
certain way.
So, it's not about giving you
all this freedom.
It's about sucking you in to
take your time.
CAT WISE: So, the goal is to
keep us on our
devices longer.
Why?
TRISTAN HARRIS: For any company
whose business
model is advertising, or
engagement-based
advertising, meaning they care
about the amount
of time someone spends on the
product, they
make more money the more time
people spend.
So, the game becomes, how can I
throw different
persuasive techniques to get
people to stay,
to spend as long as possible,
and to come
back tomorrow?
CAT WISE: And it's clearly
working.
Today, wherever we go, we're
inevitably surrounded
by fellow citizens staring into
their phones,
as we usually are too.
What do you think about when
you're out in
public and see people on their
cell phones?
TRISTAN HARRIS: You know, have
you ever been
in a moment where you're sitting
there, and
you just start using your phone
to do something
productive?
Maybe you're in the back of a
car, a taxi,
or you're on public
transportation.
Your phone is always giving you
a way to spend
time that can be more
productive, more entertaining,
or more stimulating than
reality.
I often say that this puts a new
choice on
life's menu that's sweeter than
reality.
And so we're turning to it more
and more often.
We check our phones about 150
times a day.
CAT WISE: And what are the costs
of that sort
of constant interaction with
technology, both
on an individual level and as a
society?
TRISTAN HARRIS: Well, I think
each of us have
to tune in for our own
experience.
What does it feel like when we
check our phones
150 times a day?
Or what does it feel like if we
have been
scrolling, and had our face
down, and not
breathing very much when we're
scrolling for,
say, 20 minutes?
And how do we feel on the
inside?
CAT WISE: How do you feel on the
TRISTAN HARRIS: I feel like I
don't feel very
good after that.
I feel like my anxiety goes up.
I feel more concerned about what
I'm missing,
what I'm missing out on, who I
haven't gotten
back to.
Oh, people think I'm bad at
getting back to
them.
All of this sort of psychology
emerges all
because of this one thing in my
pocket.
And we have never had a media
device that
literally a billion people are
kind of being
programmed in the same way,
where so much
influence is in the hands of a
few technology
designers.
CAT WISE: At Google, Harris was
a so-called
product philosopher and helped
design the
Gmail inbox app.
TRISTAN HARRIS: First of all,
there was no
one in the Gmail team who said,
how can we
addict people to e-mail?
There was no one who said that.
That was never a goal.
But you did hear conversations
like, should
we make it buzz your phone every
single time
you get an e-mail?
It was a design question.
But the outcome of that one
choice would be
a billion people getting buzzed
at dinners
with their dates, and with their
friends,
and with their family.
All of these billions of phones,
by the product
of this one choice, would be
affected and
interrupted all the time.
CAT WISE: And that was a
conversation that
you weren't having?
TRISTAN HARRIS: I was getting a
little bit
disenchanted with whether or not
we were having,
I thought, the bigger
conversation about when
e-mail or any product that we
make actually
makes a positive impact on
people's lives.
And I made kind of a slide deck
manifesto,
and it basically said, never
before in history
have 50, mostly male,
20-to-35-year-old designers,
living in California, working at
three tech
companies, influenced how a
billion people
spend their time.
CAT WISE: This is coffee bar in
San Francisco,
a popular hangout for
high-powered techies
like Harris, the ones whose
choices can influence
so many.
This idea of missing something,
I think that
drives a lot of us.
TRISTAN HARRIS: Tony Robbins has
a great quote.
He says: I run eight companies,
and I have
thousands of employees.
What do you think the chances
are that, at
any given moment, if I check my
e-mail, something
has gone wrong?
CAT WISE: With his organization,
Time Well
Spent, Harris is urging peers in
the tech
world to have new conversations
about the
best interests of consumers.
TRISTAN HARRIS: We need to
change the incentive.
I mean, I think, so long as the
business model
of technology companies is
advertising, we
are going to have a problem.
And that's what we're trying to
do with Time
Well Spent, is to change the
conversation
from being about maximizing
engagement and
time, to being about maximizing
net positive
improvements to people's lives.
CAT WISE: What are some examples
of, you know,
apps that people use on a pretty
regular basis,
and the ways that these
companies are drawing
us in?
TRISTAN HARRIS: Have you
noticed, if you ever
log into Twitter, as an example,
so there's
an extra delay that you don't
know how long
it's going to take, between two
and three
seconds, where that -- the
number of new notifications
on Twitter you have?
So, why is that there?
Well, it makes that into -- it's
called a
variable schedule reward.
It's like a slot machine.
So you're playing the slot
machine, and there's
a time delay.
And you're -- in that time
delay, your anticipation
is building, and then you get to
see how many
notifications I get.
And so you become more addicted
to checking
it again the next time.
CAT WISE: It sounds like there's
just a lot
of sort of trickery going on
here.
TRISTAN HARRIS: I call it the
race to the
bottom of the brain stem, to get
people's
attention at all costs.
Let's say I'm YouTube, and I
have got a certain
amount of people's attention.
What's YouTube's biggest
competitor?
Probably Facebook.
Or take -- the CEO of Netflix
recently said
that the biggest competitors to
Netflix are
probably YouTube, Facebook, and
sleep, meaning...
CAT WISE: Sleep?
TRISTAN HARRIS: Sleep, because,
at the end
of the day, there's a finite
amount of time
people have.
And if you're not getting
people's time, someone
else, some other app, or some
other part of
someone's life is going to get
it.
So these services are in
competition with
where we would want to spend our
time, whether
that's our sleep or with our
friends.
There's this war going on to get
as much attention
as possible.
CAT WISE: Tristan, tell me about
how you use
your phone.
TRISTAN HARRIS: Well, I mean, I
try to use
it as consciously as I can.
One thing, for example, is, I
set it up so
that I just have my in-and-out
tools and my
aspirational ways I want to
spend my time
on my home screen.
CAT WISE: What do you mean by
in-and-out tools?
What does that mean?
TRISTAN HARRIS: A tool is
something that you
use and you never use it longer
or more than
you want to, for example, Google
Maps.
Like, if I need directions, I
don't end up
scrolling through Google Maps
for half-an-hour
randomly, right?
I just go in, and I find where I
need to go,
and then I go out.
CAT WISE: And these are things
that really
don't draw you in for long
periods of time?
TRISTAN HARRIS: There's nothing
on my home
screen that is -- explicitly
makes money from
or wants to maximize how much
time I spend
on it.
And I put all those other things
inside of
folders that are hidden.
CAT WISE: Are people still
texting you, or
are sort of your friends and
colleagues, maybe
they're not texting you or
trying to reach
out in a way that would distract
you so often?
TRISTAN HARRIS: At the end of
the day, the
thing that dictates what -- how
someone reaches
out to you, and whether they use
Facebook
messenger or WhatsApp or
iMessage, isn't because
they're thinking deeply about
it.
It's because it's just the
fastest and easiest
thing to reach for.
And so I think we have to
recognize that,
as human beings, there's just a
certain set
of things we're vulnerable to
that do influence
us.
And if it buzzes right now, I
would probably,
without even thinking about it,
with you here,
check it.
And so, if I don't want that to
happen, I
just have to put it away.
In fact, my phone just buzzed
right now.
(LAUGHTER)
TRISTAN HARRIS: And I just
looked.
There you go.
CAT WISE: Even knowing what you
know, you
still picked it up.
TRISTAN HARRIS: And this is the
thing, that
even the people in the world of
persuasion
we were talking about earlier,
you know all
about these tricks of how to get
people to
use products and to use a slot
machine dynamic,
whatever it is.
They will tell you that they
themselves are
no less vulnerable than the
regular person,
because these techniques work on
everybody.
It's just part of being human.
MILES O'BRIEN: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Miles O'Brien.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.